# Documentation of the ATEM protocol
The ATEM protocol is a binary proprietary protocol used by Blackmagic Design to control their ATEM switchers over the network.
It is based on [UDP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_Datagram_Protocol) and a client-server architecture where the server is available on port 9910 of the ATEM switchers.

The protocol starts off with an [opening handshake](#opening-handshake) initiated by the client.
After that, data can be [sent](#sending-commands) to and [received](#receiving-commands) from the server.
It uses a constant and frequent [heartbeat](#heartbeat) to ensure the clients are still alive and has a [closing handshake](#closing-handshake) to properly disconnect.

## Other resources
Since it is a proprietary protocol it has been very helpful to read what others have found and documented while reverse engineering it.
Here I have listed the resources that have been the most helpful to me.
* [Skaarhojs Arduino library](https://github.com/kasperskaarhoj/SKAARHOJ-Open-Engineering/tree/master/ArduinoLibs/ATEMbase)
* [Skaarhojs command documentation](https://www.skaarhoj.com/discover/blackmagic-atem-switcher-protocol)
* [NRKs NodeJS library](https://github.com/nrkno/tv-automation-atem-connection)
* [Documentation on openswitcher.org](https://docs.openswitcher.org/udptransport.html)
* [Documentation on node-atem](https://github.com/miyukki/node-atem/blob/master/specification.md)
* [Blackmagics camera control protocol documentation](https://documents.blackmagicdesign.com/DeveloperManuals/BlackmagicCameraControl.pdf)

## Testing
This documentation can be confirmed to be accurate with the test suite.
If Blackmagic would change something about the protocol in future firmware versions, the tests are designed to detect that and help keeping the documentation up-to-date.

## Data structure
This is what the ATEM protocol structure looks like.
The protocol uses a 12 byte header with an optional variable length payload.

```
 0               1               2               3
 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
+ ------- + ------------------- + ----------------------------- +
|  flags  |       length        |           session id          |
+ ------- + ------------------- + ----------------------------- +
|             ack id            |         local packet id       |
+ ----------------------------- + ----------------------------- +
|           unknown id          |        remote packet id       |
+ ----------------------------- + ----------------------------- +
|                           payload...                          |
+ ------------------------------------------------------------- +
```

### Flags

#### Ack request flag 0x08
Undocumented

#### SYN flag 0x10
The SYN flag is set for SYN packets, used in the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake) and [closing handshake](#closing-handshake).
It can only be combined with the [retransmit flag](#retransmit-flag-0x20).
A SYN packet has an 8 byte payload, giving it a total [length](#length) of 20 bytes including the header, where the first byte of the payload is the [opcode](#opcode).

#### Retransmit flag 0x20
If a packet requires an acknowledgement but the sender does not get one in a timely manner, the packet should/will be resent, this time with the retransmit flag set.

#### Retransmit request flag 0x40
Undocumented

#### Ack flag 0x80
Undocumented

### Length
Indicates the length of the packet and is defined with 11 bits, giving it a maximum packet length of 2047 bytes.
That includes the 12 byte header, so the minimum packet length is 12 bytes when no payload is available.

### Session id
Since the ATEM protocol uses [UDP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_Datagram_Protocol) and not [TCP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol), it is connectionless at the [transport layer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_layer).
The session id is used to identify and separate the connections.

There are two types of session ids.
A client assigned session id and a server assigned session id.
They can both have a value between 0x0000 and 0x7fff.
The [MSB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_numbering) is reserved to indicate if the id is assigned by the client or the server.
If the bit is set, it means the session id is assigned by the server and if it is clear, it is assigned by the client.
The client assigned session id is randomly generated by the client for the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake) and is only used for that.
The server assigned session id is an incrementing id on the server that continuously increments by 1 for every connected session until it wraps around at 0x7fff back to 0x0000.
The server gives the client the server assigned session id during the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake) and the client should switch over to using that right after the handshake is complete.

The servers session id counter is not persistent, so if the switcher looses power or is rebooted the counter resets.
The first server assigned session id is 0x0001 instead of 0x0000.

### Ack id
Undocumented

### Local packet id
Undocumented

### Unknown id
This unknown id is not an incrementing id in the same way the local and packet ids are.
The high byte seems to always be clear and it seems no one knows what these two bytes are used for, even though they are used.
Keeping them both set to 0 also seems to work, even though that is not what the ATEM software control does.

### Remote packet id
Undocumented

### Payload
The payload is the remaining length of the packet after the header and a packet is allowed to have a payload length of 0 (total packet [length](#length) of 12 bytes) indicating there is no payload available after the header.
The data the payload contains depends on the [flags](#flags) that are set.

### Opcode
Opcodes are available in SYN packets that are defined by the [SYN flag](#syn-flag-0x10) being set.
It is located at the first byte of the SYN packets payload.

#### Opening opcode 0x01
This opcode is sent by the client to initiate an [opening handshake](#opening-handshake) and is always used with a [client assigned session id](#session-id).

#### Successful opcode 0x02
This opcode is one of two possible opcodes received from the server during an [opening handshake](#opening-handshake).
It indicates that the client was successfully connected to the ATEM switcher.
The third and fourth byte of the [SYN packets](#syn-flag-0x10) payload indicates the [server assigned session id](#session-id) and should be the [session id](#session-id) used for everything other than the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake).
The [server assigned session id](#session-id) has the [MSB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_numbering) clear when received during the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake), but when used for future communication with the switcher, the bit should always be set.

#### Rejected opcode 0x03
This opcode is one of two possible opcodes received from the server during an [opening handshake](#opening-handshake).
It indicates that the clients request to connect failed.
The reason for a reject is most likely due to the switchers very limited number of concurrent connections.
Depending on the switcher model, it can handle either 5 or 8 connections at the same time before starting to reject new requests.

#### Closing opcode 0x04
This opcode is used when initiating a [closing handshake](#closing-handshake).
Normally, it is only [resent](#resend-flag-0x20) a single time if it is not responded to in a timely manner.

#### Closed opcode 0x05
This opcode is a response to a [closing request](#closing-opcode-0x04), informing the other party that the request was received and that the connection has been shut down.

## Opening handshake
When connecting to an ATEM switcher, it all starts with an opening handshake.
The ATEM protocol handshake is a 3-way handshake, just like a [TCP handshake](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/TCP_handshake), consisting of a SYN packet, a SYNACK packet and an ACK packet.

The first packet in the handshake, the [SYN packet](#syn-flag-0x10), is sent by the client with the [opcode](#opcode) set to indicate it wants to [open](#opening-opcode-0x01) a new session.
It uses a randomly generated [client assigned session id](#session-id) that should be used for all packets during the opening handshake.
The ATEM server responds to that request with a SYNACK packet (also has the [SYN flag](#syn-flag-0x10) set like the SYN packet) where the [opcode](#opcode) either indicates that the connection was a [success](#successful-opcode-0x02) or that it was [rejected](rejected-opcode-0x03).
In the case that the client does not receive a response in a timely manner, it should [resend](#retransmit-flag-0x20) the packet, normally a maximum of 10 times before [closing the session](#closing-handshake).
If a handshake is rejected, it is not going to receive any more data and does not require sending anything in response.
A successful handshake on the other hand has to be responded to with an ACK packet to complete the 3-way handshake.
It is also here, in the success response, we get the [server assigned session id](#session-id).
The ACK for the SYNACK is the last packet to use the [client assigned session id](#session-id) and all future packets should use the new [server assigned session id](#session-id).
Normally, [ACK packets](#ack-flag-0x80) are only sent as a response to packets [requesting acknowledgement](#ack-request-flag-0x80), but during the handshake it is sent without specifically being requested as a response to the [success opcode](#success-opcode-0x02).
The [ACK packet](#ack-flag-0x80) does not have a payload, giving it a packet [length](#length) of only 12 bytes for the required header.
If the client does not acknowledge the SYNACK by sending the ACK in a timely manner, or the packet gets lost on the way, the ATEM server will resend the SYNACK packet again, this time with the [resend flag](#retransmit-flag-0x20) set.
The ATEM server will resend the SYNACK packet 10 times before trying to [close the connection](#closing-handshake).

After these 3 packets, the opening handshake is considered complete.
From this point forward, the [client assigned session id](#session-id) should not be used.
Instead, the [server assigned session id](#session-id), that was received from the [success response](#successful-opcode-0x02), should be used, but with the [MSB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit_numbering) set.
The server will also at this point send all of its internal states to the client.
These states will be spread out over multiple packets as it does not fit within the maximum [length](#length) of an ATEM packet.
Whenever an internal state changes, the client will receive the updated state as long as the connection is [kept alive](#heartbeat).
Read more about receiving commands from the switcher [here](#receiving-commands).

### Example

In this example, the client randomly generated the [client assigned session id](#session-id) 0x7440 and the servers next [server assigned session id](#session-id) was 0x0001.
```
                         header                          payload
        + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +
Client: | 10 14 74 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 | 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
        + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +

        + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +
Server: | 10 14 74 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 | 02 00 00 01 00 00 00 00 |
        + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +

        + ----------------------------------- +
Client: | 80 0c 74 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
        + ----------------------------------- +

```

## Closing handshake
A closing handshake starts when either the server or the client sends a [SYN packet](#syn-flag-0x10) with the [opcode](#opcode) set to [closing](#closing-opcode-0x04).
When the other side receives the closing request, it needs to respond to it with a [SYN packet](#syn-flag-0x10) that has the [opcode](#opcode) set to [closed](#closed-opcode-0x05).
Only after receiving either of these [opcodes](#opcodes) should the session be considered terminated.
In the case that the initiator does not receive a response in a timely manner, it is allowed to [resend](#retransmit-flag-0x20) the packet once.

Packets have a maximum number of [resends](#retransmit-flag-0x20), depending on what type of packet it is.
When that limit is reached, the session will still end with a closing handshake.
This might sound unnecessary, but sometimes packets are not dropped completely, but are instead delayed.
In that case, when the other side receives all the delayed packets, receiving a [closing request](#closing-opcode-0x04) lets it know that the session has been terminated.

The session id in a closing handshake always uses the [server assigned session id](#session-id), even if the connection is closed during the [opening handshake](#opening-handshake).
This technically means that the session can not be closed before the [server assigned session id](#session-id) has been received.

### Example

```
                            header                          payload
           + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +
Initiator: | 10 14 80 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 | 04 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
           + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +

           + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +
Responder: | 10 14 80 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 | 05 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 |
           + ----------------------------------- + ----------------------- +

```

## Receiving commands
Undocumented

## Sending commands
Undocumented

## Heartbeat
Undocumented

<!--
# Acknowledgements
* Acknowledgements can be required by both the server and the client.
* When an acknowledgement is required, the "ack request" (0x08) flag is set.
* If other side does not acknowledge a packet that requires an acknowledgement, it should be resent.
* ATEM resends packets fairly quickly, so they might not even have arrived at the client before ATEM resends the packet.
* Resending packets is essential since UDP does not guarantee the packet will not get lost on the way.
* When a packet is resent, the flag "is retransmit" (0x20) is set. It seems to work even if this flag is not set though.
* An acknowledge request has the "remote packet id" set. It is an incrementing number local to the session.
* An acknowledgement is done in response to an acknowlege request and sets the "ack packet id" to the value of "remote packet id".



# Heartbeat
* ATEM uses a constant heartbeat to know when a connection is lost.
* Both the server and client ping the other end about twice a second.
* The ping packet has both the "ack request" (0x08) and "ack reply" 0x80 flags set.
* The length of the packet is just 12 bytes, so there is no data sent.



# Commands
* After the handshake, all data after the header is command data.
If packet is only the length of the header, there is no command data.
* A packet can contain multiple commands concatenated together within the max payload length of the packet.
* Commands consist of a length (2 bytes), padding (2 bytes), a command name (4 bytes) and comand data (n bytes).

```
 0                   1                   2
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|        command length         |            padding            |
+-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
|                         command name                          |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
|                        command data...                        |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Command length
* The command length is the length of the command data, including the command header.

## Command name
* The command names are 4 ASCII characters and a compiled list can be found [here](https://www.skaarhoj.com/discover/blackmagic-atem-switcher-protocol).

## Command data
* Length of command data is the same as the value of `command length`.
* Content depends on the command name.

# Timeout
* The ATEM switcher seems to kill connections after not receiving acknowledgements for about 4 seconds.
-->

